## Basics of a Ponzi Scheme

Suppose a person were to borrow $100 from you and tell you that they will pay it back with 10% interest in a month's time period. And then suppose, after you loaned them that money, but two months goes by, without you hearing from them. So, naturally, you may want to inquire about the debt owed to you. Eventually, you somehow manage to catch a hold of that cunning person, and they plead with you to give them some more time, and as a gesture of "good-faith" they return $50 to you, promising yet again, to return the full amount of the debt along with the additional interests owed to you, for the months of delay. 

In the mean time, that person goes around and pulls the same trick with dozens or hundreds of more people. Each time, enriching themselves, and then paying off a part of the loan taken from a previous lender, with the money gained from the next unsuspecting lender, while pocketing the net amount. 

The person who cheats people by abusing the public's trust, does so, using a Ponzi Scheme, to pay off a part of the debt owed to one lender (or a creditor) by abusing the loan or credit from another lender (or a targeted victim). Within a year, such a scheme can generate thousands of dollars of unearned cash, by conning hundreds of lenders using such an illegal money circulation scheme.

---

#### Ponzi Schemes Being Operated by a Group of Central Universities in India

Now, suppose that cheater was an executive official of an institute or a private corporation. The borrowed loans and the owed liabilities would be attributed in the name of the company or the corporate body, by that offending official, who could even file for bankruptcy and then escape prosecution, by claiming indemnity as an executive of a company or an institute. 

The cleverer cheats position themselves as board members of a company, or as chair persons of an executive council in an institute, to have their underlings or managers do their dirty work. The bosses or executive officers keep their hands clean and feign ignorance of any fiduciary wrongdoings, while controlling and directing their trained workers, using policy based incentives and inducements. The identity of the criminal mastermind in such a Ponzi Scheme orchestrated via proxy agents recruited by a company or an institute, becomes anonymized via the "socially accepted" rights and liberties given to members of corporate boards and executive councils. 

Now, suppose, officials of a university were to promise you that they will cover the full charges of your medical bills as part of the incentives and emoluments owed to you as a worker of that university. Then, after a while, those officials change their institutional policy to covering only 50% or 70% of the medical charges you may incur during a financial year. They disclose that policy to you, by unilaterally forcing it onto you. Plus, how would you have been able to get that policy changed in any way, now that you are stuck as an employee or as a retiree of that university, under the political thumb of its executive council? 

Eventually, the officials of that university start to abuse your trust in much more insidious ways, by not even giving you 35% of the total medical reimbursement amount owed to you. Worse, those officials were always operating an unlicensed insurance company in the guise of a "Cash Advance Program" for the healthcare needs of the university's employees and retirees. 

You find out that the university receives a bulk amount of money from the "Central Government" in the form of the University's annual budget. The university's executive officers then allocate an amount of the total budget given to them, as "expenses for welfare and healthcare" of the university's employees, scholars, and retirees. Those officers, conveniently mix that budget, into an account for the "University Maintenance Budget" instead of keeping it as a separate financial account. So, whenever an amount of money is owed to the claimant for medical reimbursements, the university's officers reimburse an amount, based on their "discretion", as stated in their institutional policy. In this manner, the medical reimbursements given to individuals across the set of employees, scholars, and retirees, always ends up becoming non-uniform in its outlay, because of discrimination against particular groups of university members. This type of a scam and abuse remains hidden within the so-called discretionary judgments and actions taken by the university's executive officers.  

Those executive officers, thus, pay off some of the amount owed to each successive claimant of a medical reimbursement claim, by bilking a certain amount owed to the previous claimant. The total amount owed to each claimant, is of course, never paid off by the university's officials. Eventually, those executive officers conveniently hide behind the shield of the institute's policies and statutes, if any one of those claimants for medical reimbursements gets agitated from suffering such mistreatment and abuse. Finally, the net amount of money that is skimmed off-the-top, from each medical reimbursement claim, is distributed to executive officers via the University Maintenance Account, in the form of petrol expenses for the executives' vehicles, grounds improvements for the executives' living quarters, equipment and furniture of the executives' offices, and so on and so forth.  

Each month, hundreds of medical reimbursement claims are systematically "adjusted" by the university's officers, in the name of "cost-cutting measures for university budgeting via the 'discretion' of the university's executive council." 

In a year, hundreds of thousands of dollars worth of money (in Indian Rupees) is thus stolen, by this simple yet elegant mechanism for orchestrating a ***Ponzi Scheme*** across dozens of India's central universities and higher learning institutes. 

---

So, why would the claimants of medical reimbursements in those institutes, want to play along in such an illicit money circulation scheme, if they are the ones who continuously keep suffering financial and equity based losses? Those poor claimants, as ordinary university members, are compelled to participate in such a scheme by the university's officials through the force of the institute's policies, and also through false-advertisements about receiving a "better deal" from the university's Cash Advance Program compared to utilizing coverage from any private insurance companies. Worst of all, the retirees of Central Government entities in India, absolutely do not have any other choice but to keep incurring losses through such irregular Cash Advance Programs, thrust upon them by their ex-employers, because of their old age. 

Senior citizens as retired and non-unionized individuals form Central Government entities, simply cannot gain access to any private insurance company's healthcare coverage plan, because their age typically happens to be above 70 years, and there is no private insurer who will economically offer a health insurance plan to such dying and decrepit "veterans." The claimants are captive victims of an organized crime who still can't seem to be able to wise up and unite, in a just fight for their fundamental rights to protection from getting exploited and cheated by their Central Government employers. Any of them who do realize the crux of this situation, only remain despondent from also recognizing their helplessness in their frail and elderly age, in the face of such a dastardly scam. 

It is of course understandable, why thousands of victims in dozens of India's central universities are still being easily cheated in this manner, and the simple reason is that, the theft and mismanagement of public funds has become culturally endemic, as it has been continuing for decades throughout the country, under the watchful eyes and through the direct control of various ministers of the Parliament.  

Those ministers and bureaucrats of the Indian Central Government as Public Servants, have far greater immunity and indemnities from being lawfully prosecuted for any type of a crime, than the executive officers of each central university and public sector unit. So, if the executives of central institutes and public sector units can barely ever be prosecuted, there is practically a chance of zero percent for their superior bosses in the central government, to ever get arrested and prosecuted for such corruption.  

All of this, is supposedly an "internal matter" that will somehow be handled and resolved through "internal mechanisms" of the Indian Central Government's audit and law enforcement directorates. 

Either that will happen, or there will be riots in every state of the Republic because religious minorities and economically backward groups including members of Dalit communities are being surreptitiously harmed in a systematic and targeted way, by Upper-Caste Hindu officials in-charge of India's central universities and institutions for higher education.  

---