## rent-seeking behaviors of certain hospitals 

Within India, and also in general, accredited private and public hospitals provide an essential service to the public at large. It is true that in a hospital setting, the patient’s life and limb are constantly at stake and the patient is typically at risk, of suffering hospital acquired diseases or injuries. Wrongful death at a hospital due to medical malpractice, is perhaps one of the worst risks that a patient can suffer. With such palpable risks to patients and to their families, the only way to ensure patient safety and also the safety of their next-of-kin in a clinical setting, is to maintain the highest standard of quality in modern medicine and within ethical management of all hospital related practices. 

Accredited hospitals, particularly the giant corporate ones across cities in India, also impact public health as well as public healthcare policies. They do so, in the form of members of self-regulating and self-accrediting corporations within agencies such as *National Accreditation Board for Hospitals & Healthcare Providers (NABH).* Through NABH, for the better or for the worse, corporate hospitals are able to certify and award themselves the standard of quality in healthcare services, that they intend to maintain, and are also able to lobby for changes in public healthcare polices of the Central Government of India. 

The NABH however, is not a Central Government owned and operated institute in India. It does not take directives from the Central Government's Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. In fact, the NABH as a private corporation that does not have a Central Government based obligation or mandate, to be publicly accountable as a quality assurance provider, with a priority towards public safety that is above the obligations it has to its private board members. The corporate bosses and leaders of various private hospital conglomerates that obtain certification through NABH for quality assurance in hospital management, are among the influential board members, of the NABH. 

The current situation in India's healthcare industry, is very similar to the way things used to be in the global aviation industry decades ago, wherein, corporate bosses of private conglomerates like Boeing Inc, used to be the board members of privately run quality assurance agencies. That of course changed throughout the world, because of a necessity to ensure public safety in aviation as a top priority. And government based entities for quality assurance in manufacturing and operation of all aviation related systems were thus, created by countries with mature economies. Aircraft crash investigations, aircraft maintenance, airport management, passenger and crew safety, and other topics related to insurance within aviation, also became standardized and better regulated, through government agencies of respective countries that have continued to collaborate with each other, to create and implement internationally viable rules and regulations, via the International Standards Organization (ISO).  

Coming back to the topic of national level healthcare regulations:   

>Regardless of how publicly accountable private hospitals and clinics can be in any given country, all private as well as government controlled hospitals exist as "public facing entities with a critical role and responsibility towards pubic health and safety." Therefore, such hospitals and clinics have a fiduciary duty towards the Consumer, as well as a civic duty towards the public at large, particularly in democratic countries like India, for maintaining ***equality*** **in standards** of healthcare products and services provided to members of the public. Those essential healthcare products and services must necessarily be provided to Consumers without deficiencies, delinquencies, or discriminatory prejudices pertaining to class, creed, religion, language, gender, age, region, physical or mental handicap, or any other categorical factor involved in discriminatory practices. 

What must and should be done, is of course different from what is being done, especially when it comes to India's healthcare industry. However, one of the core and foundational principals that need to be changed immediately within the Indian healthcare industry, is the predatory behavior of certain private hospitals and clinics that has continued to be harmful and injurious to the public at large. 

That predatory behavior involves "rent-seeking" practices wherein the patient is captured by the hospital, and treated as a renter or a boarder who owes rents to the hospital, based on the square foot area around the bed allotted to the patient. 

More specifically, patients <ins>are not</ins> renters or lodgers or boarders, in any hospital or a clinic. Patients and their next-of-kin do not sign a “renters agreement”, before the patients receive any kind of a treatment or service at a healthcare provider's physical location. And yet, various hospitals and clinics throughout India have continued to cunningly up-sell the identical form of healthcare accommodations available in other "accredited and recognized" hospitals, at a hiked premium with unfair surcharges. Those problematic hospitals have been able to conduct such unfair trade practices using cunning marketing tactics, only to exploit and extract "rental profits" from patients who are in dire need for legitimate healthcare goods and services. 

One of the most unfair trade practice of those types of culpable hospitals includes: 

- Positioning rooms with a single bed for patient accommodation in the hospital, as a “luxury” or a “deluxe” option, compared to shared room accommodations for other patients. 

- Charging a premium price for the so-called private room wherein, the cost of each consultation and visit performed by the medical staff for patients in rooms with single beds, happens to be multiple times greater than the cost of the very same medical services provided by those very same nurses and doctors, for patients in the shared room accommodations. 

- Charging a premium price for medical as well as non-medical products and services, for patients in the single patient room, compared to the very same products and services sold to patients in the shared room accommodation. 

In the above type of cheating and scam, the medical staff do not provide any "value-added service" for the extra costs and premium fees they charge for the medical attention they provide to a patient, in the so-called private room with a single bed. The private room often has an attached bathroom, for "convenience and privacy", but then so does the shared room accommodation. Therefore, by no means does a doctor or a nurse, provide better or higher quality medical services with better bed-side manners to other patients needing the same medical treatment, based on the type of privacy in a room, nor do the medical products change based on the type of accommodation. However, if doctors and nurses were to provide downgraded services and lower quality medical attention to patients in shared room accommodation, alongside better healthcare products and services to those in single rooms, merely because of the "policy based price differential", then it would be a form of ongoing ethical violation and medical malpractice in those hospitals. 

The extra charges for medical products and services in a single room, are directly and entirely a form of theft, by manipulating the Consumer via marketing tactics to suggest that the medical treatment they would get in a single accommodation room, would somehow be more customized or effective.

The unfair trade practice of overcharging Consumers using marketing gimmicks and the force of suggestion about privacy and convenience being a "Consumer Choice", that is supposed to come at a premium cost, is a rampant problem throughout most hospitals and clinics in India. This seems to be mainly because the cast and class based social system of "First Rate Citizens versus, Second or Third Rate Citizens", is still very deeply embedded in societal norms and culture. 

<br>

>***A solution for rectifying the above type of disservice,*** being committed in various hospitals that discriminate against persons based on the economic or social status of the patient, would be to charge the same tariff for accommodations within single and shared rooms for all patients, with a separate cost component for any verifiable non-medical convenience available in a hospital room with a single bed. The verifiable benefit of specialty medical products and services, utilized in specialized rooms such as Intensive Care Units or Emergency Rooms is obvious, which then properly justifies the added costs for those types of special benefits. But by no means, should the cost for medical products and services, particularly for the fees for medical attention given to the patients by doctors and nurses, ever be allowed to become a factor for creating or engendering class based discrimination, in regular hospitals and clinics. 
>
>The fiduciary and civic duties of all public facing private and government operated hospitals, that are healthcare providers to the public at large, have the irrevocable responsibility to make equality in healthcare, accessible and affordable to the communities, districts, states, and the national or international regions those healthcare providers choose to serve. That responsibility also naturally includes the duty to provide healthcare products and services to patients, without gouging, pilfering, or frustrating any Consumers, i.e. members of the general public. 
>
>Without this form of a rectification being implemented, every medical and managerial staff of hospitals practicing the unfair activity of extracting rents from patients or the families of patients, will remain complicit that form of cheating and price gouging. They will remain liable and culpable for cashing those unearned incomes.  


<br>

Hospitals and clinics belong to the "medical and pharmaceutical industry", and they most certainly are not lodges or hotels or motels, belonging to the "general services industry." This is because the existent risk of loss of life or limb, to the patient in the medical and pharmaceutical industry, necessitates that the business operations and trade practices of the healthcare provider be above board, compassionate, and in good-faith, at all times. Resorts, hostels, lodges, motels, and hotels belonging to the "services industry" or to the "hospitality and restaurant industry", do not need to constantly provide that level of care to their Consumers the way healthcare providers do. 

More importantly, healthcare products and services are never supposed to be sold under the guise of “hospitality” by using trickery or treachery, or any type of false advertisements, specifically because of the potential for irreparable damages to public health and safety that can occur from erroneous healthcare providers. 
